# 3x3x3 Rubik's Cube

## Setting

We consider the 3x3x3 Rubik's cube. It has $6$ sides with $9$ color points each. The puzzle has a total of $8$ corner pieces, $12$ edge pieces and $6$ center pieces.
### Move corners
It is NOT possible to swap two corners without changing anything else in the puzzle.

But it is possible to swap $3$ corners in a cycle.

### Rotate corners
It is NOT possible to rotate a single corner $120$° or $240$°. All corner rotations must be a multiple of $360$° when added together.

### Move edges
It is NOT possible to swap two edges without changing anything else on the cube.

Though it is possible to swap $3$ edges in a cycle.

### Rotate edges
It is also NOT possible to flip a single edge piece.
However it is possible to flip two edge pieces together.

## Derivation

Therefor the set of all possible states can be generated by permuting all corners and all edges: with $8$ corners there are $8!$ ways to swap corners as well as $12!$ ways to swap edges.

In addition we can rotate each corner in $3$ different directions and each edge in $2$ different ways. Therefor we have $8! \cdot 12! \cdot 3^8 \cdot 2^{12}$ possible states.

But that's counting the invalid rotations described before. So we have to devide by $3$ since the sum of all corner rotations can be equal to $(120 \mod 360)$, $(240\mod 360)$ or $(0\mod 360)$ of which only the last one is valid. We also need to divide by $2$ because there are two possible arrangements of edges which cannot be transferred into oneanother.

There could also be a single flipped edge which would result in a state that cannot be achieved through legal moves. Therefor we have to devide by $2$ a second time.

This reasoning is explained and proven in more detail in many other publications and sources.

## Result

So in general there are $8! \cdot 3^7 \cdot 12! \cdot 2^10 = 43,252,003,274,489,856,000 \approx 4.3 \cdot 10^{19}$ possible states of a 3x3x3 Rubik's cube.
This is significantly more than the $88,179,840 = 8.8 \cdot 10^{7}$ possible states of a 2x2x2 Rubik's cube.